---
title: My trip to the ACS Spring 2022 conference
tagline: Or, how I got dragged into a computational chemistry research project and
  went on vacation to San Diego
tags:
- travel
- chemistry
- project:mdsapt
- project:qr-tattoo
slug:
  date: 2022-03-24
  ordinal: 0
  name: acs-spring-2022
date:
  created: 2022-03-24 14:34:12-07:00
  published: 2022-03-24 14:34:12-07:00

---

I guess I'm a travel blogger now.

## Context

![Domino meme. Small domino: meeting some random girl at a queer Halloween party you went to on a whim. Big domino: going to some a chemistry conference in San Diego](https://s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com/nyaabucket/144a3978e2a5238f35a3eb1f6ed661d6b4cc019302f3bfb3786e82e7efb22af6/domino-meme.jpg)

So I met [this girl named Alia Lescoulie](https://alescoulie.github.io) at a
queer Halloween party last fall and we kinda hit it off; we both used Linux, we
both liked programming, and we both knew enough about urbanism to complain about
[stroads](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ORzNZUeUHAM). Anyways, long story
short, after getting past the useless lesbian phase, we started dating!

She was working on a research project called [MD-SAPT](/projects/mdsapt) and
needed help setting up deployment-related stuff, like the CI/CD pipeline,
documentation, package deployment, and other stuff. So, I joined
[Dr. Ashley Ringer McDonald](https://armcdona.github.io/)'s computational
chemistry lab and got those things done.

Since I contributed to those things and became a co-author on the poster, I went
on a Cal Poly-funded vacation to San Diego to present MD-SAPT at the
[American Chemical Society (ACS)](https://www.acs.org/) spring 2022 conference.

## Saturday

I woke up with a slightly sore throat on the day before the conference, likely
due to allergies. I ate some spicy instant ramen, which made that sore throat
worse. Oh well.

### The ride there

We left at 10AM from Cal Poly. On our trip from SLO to San Diego, Alia and I
were arguing about how we would implement an organic chemistry problem solver,
while I was getting her to crash-course me on the basic organic chemistry
reactions.

Professor Bercovici was driving us. As we were in the middle of arguing, he
asked, "how would I go about recruiting CS majors to my lab?"

"Well, you could go to a queer halloween party, chat up a cute girl, and recruit
her," said Alia.

"I legally cannot do that myself, and I'm pretty sure if I get my students to do
it, that would count as pimping."

We stopped at a mall in Ventura for a lunch break. There were these old men
giving out what were supposedly million-dollar bills. As expected, these were
not legal tender, but an attempt at prosletyzing us. On the back, it said that
if I had looked upon a woman in lust, then I was an adulterer that would go to
hell.

![The million dollar bill.](https://s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com/nyaabucket/58614ecc05183a9820494edc9443e2c8d5af8129ae2b1b9d64d4e32ebc19e707/million-dollars.png)

There have been plenty of times where I woke up and thought my girlfriend was
really cute, so I guess I'll be going to hell. I mean, I'm already going to hell
for being gay, so I might as well make the most of it.

### Arriving in San Diego

In the evening, I went to
[Sab Lai Thai Kitchen](https://www.sablaithaikitchen.com/) with Alia, and it had
really delicious food with lots of vegan options. However, I chose a 7/10
spiciness despite my sore throat, which in retrospect was a bad idea. Oh well.

## Sunday

My sore throat worsened, so I spent most of the day shoving cough drops into my
mouth.

### Symposia

I attended some presentations in computational chemistry (COMP) and chemical
informatics (CINF). Most of the COMP ones went _way_ over my head; they were
mostly about using computers to solve chemistry problems, which I had basically
zero context for. I did see some words such as "tensor core" and "PyTorch" and
"Monte Carlo" and was like "yeah, I know what's happening!"

I did notice that when the presentation focused more on computational stuff, I
understood it more. There was one that focused less on the chemistry, and more
on optimizing an existing algorithm, and I actually knew what was going on.
Otherwise, Alia had to explain to me, in a hushed voice, what free energy was
and how it was calculated.

The CINF symposium I attended was super interesting and a lot more accessible
for a CS person like me. There were presentations about how to represent
molecules, based in graph theory, so that was super cool and actually quite
relevant to our solver.

That afternoon, we went to the Undergrad COMP symposium, which Dr. McDonald
presented at. At the end, there was a panel about computational chemistry in
industry. Alia asked what kinds of roles there are to work in. It turns out that
a lot of solutions aren't single-package end-to-end solutions; there's a lot of
code needed to glue them all together, and people pay big bucks for that. That's
great, because our project was literally just gluing MDAnalysis and Psi4
together.

### Evening

We wanted to try out the electric rental scooters (scattered around by Lyft and
Lime) to get to a dinner place, but unfortunately, you need a driver's license
to use those, and Alia didn't have one. We walked over instead. We ate at
[Sushi 2](https://sushi2sd.com/), and just like the Thai place, it was also
delicious and had a ton of vegan options. Like seriously, they had a whole
section of the menu for vegan stuff, which I absolutely didn't expect for a
_sushi_ restaurant.

Sci-Mix was on Monday, so in order to make
[our Jupyter notebook demo](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/calpolyccg/MDSAPT_demo/master?labpath=MD-SAPT_demo.ipynb)
look cooler, we picked out some more interesting interaction pairs to run on
gfdesk (my rack server) overnight. We were fiddling with the 3D molecule views
on our 2D screens and making comments about how cool it would be to have a VR
viewer.

## Monday

I didn't really attend any symposiums on Monday. Also, my sore throat got much
worse, which was quite inconvenient because we were presenting at Sci-Mix that
afternoon.

However, I did go to the Expo in Exhibit Hall A, where all the industry folks
came down to advertise their super high-tech chemical hardware. This included
the $10,000 personal DNA printer, delta robot auto-pipetters, NMR machines,
vaccum chambers...

One super cool company was [Nanome](https://nanome.ai/), which was a startup
that made a VR molecule browser, which literally just so happened to be what we
were talking about last night. We tried their software and it was very cool;
they even let you view animated MD trajectories. Perhaps we can get Dr. McDonald
to buy a Quest 2 for our new lab.

![Alia using the Nanome software at the Expo.](https://s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com/nyaabucket/63d58937a3c05f9a006585487135f4ec4e62501546ba4e1fcc6ad94c702b85b4/nanome.jpg)

Another interesting thing we saw at the expo was Sigma Aldrich's
recently-released graph theory-based organic synthesis solver, meaning our idea
has been done before. However, we'd release whatever we make as an open source
thing, so perhaps we can put theirs out of business eventually.

### Sci-Mix!

That evening, we ate leftover Thai food from Saturday and headed out to present
our poster at Sci-Mix in Exhibit Hall C. It was a somewhat-intense 2 hours of
standing around and getting asked questions by passerbys; we probably talked
with 30 people that night.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Come check out our poster on sci mix <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSSpring2022?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSSpring2022</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSCOMP?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSCOMP</a> <a href="https://t.co/hfLOq5Zb7N">pic.twitter.com/hfLOq5Zb7N</a></p>&mdash; Alia Lescoulieüè≥Ô∏è‚Äçüåà (@AliaLescoulie) <a href="https://twitter.com/AliaLescoulie/status/1506101533179473924?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 22, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

We presented close to a Sigma Aldrich table giving out free t-shirts or tote
bags, so there was a huge wall of people in front of us. As soon as they ran out
of free stuff, the line completely vaporized.

It was interesting to see all the different kinds of people there. There were
academics from big-name universities, industry people, students, and more. Some
of the academics were quite intense; they interrogated us on some weird stuff,
and on how SAPT worked. On the other hand, most industry people were like "this
is super cool!"

You could definitely tell who was more interested in the software and who was
more interested in the chemistry. Unfortunately, there were more people
interested in the chemistry, so I didn't get many chances to deliver my spiel
about my amazing CI/CD pipeline that tests our 95% coverage test suite on Linux
and MacOS and Python 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9.

Our poster had a QR code linking to our documentation website at
[mdsapt.readthedocs.io](https://mdsapt.readthedocs.io/), but I also linked my QR
tattoo to that link. It was admittedly a bit of a silly gimmick, but it did get
a lot of people to scan my arm and see the poster.

## Tuesday

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Finally got our photo with the sign, we‚Äôre basically software engineers except the software does chemistry <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSCOMP?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSCOMP</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSsandiego?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSsandiego</a> <a href="https://t.co/cLrJRpkUzk">pic.twitter.com/cLrJRpkUzk</a></p>&mdash; Alia Lescoulieüè≥Ô∏è‚Äçüåà (@AliaLescoulie) <a href="https://twitter.com/AliaLescoulie/status/1506405983219642371?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 22, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

My throat was once again sore, but I had to soldier on because we were
presenting our poster again at the COMP poster session.

Dr. McDonald's postdoc advisor,
[Alexander Mackerell](https://twitter.com/alex_mackerell), won a major ACS award
for computational drug design or something like that, so we planned to go to
that symposium. Unfortunately, it was scheduled to end 1 hour before the poster
session, so we planned ahead by eating lunch at Sushi 2 and bringing home some
sushi to-go for dinner.

![Us getting sushi for lunch.](https://s3.us-west-000.backblazeb2.com/nyaabucket/048a601bb0703b0d452c2e357651da6e9de6b6ed9e4d74de8b01cc0acd1cd5d1/sushi-2.jpg)

### Mackerell Symposium

At an award symposium, the winner usually invites their former postdocs and
graduate students, so you get to see a lot of similar research. Alia had heard
of some of their work, while I had absolutely none of the context and all of
them went over my head. It was apparently on biophysical simulations using MD,
so I got that part, but I completely didn't know what the heck Yoda-1 or a force
field was.

Dr. McDonald gave her talk on our project, MD-SAPT, and her work with the
[Molecular Sciences Software Institute (MolSSI)](https://molssi.org/). It was
almost entirely accurate except for the part where she said that she didn't
contribute a single line of code to our project. She actually did, it was just
[updating a singular line of our README to include our NSF grant number](https://github.com/calpolyccg/MDSAPT/commit/ccf3682650ad5075b91515e9a3f84c64f0b336fc).

Interestingly, a lot of his postdocs went into industry, but went into competing
biotech companies developing competing drugs. They're still friends with each
other, but their presentations gave no information other than "here's a blurred
image of the drug we made because I'm under NDA and the legal department told me
to blur it and plus a lot of my competitors are in my room so I don't want to
give them ideas either."

At the intermission, Dr. McDonald told us to leave and get ready for our poster
session. This was an extremely good call; Dr. Mackerell presented last and went
30 minutes over his allotted time, and no one could really do anything about it
because it's his symposium and he gets to do whatever he wants. He went over his
entire career, _publication by publication_. At the end, he put up the lyrics of
a cheesy parody he wrote of a Beatles song (instead of "Hey Jude," it was "Hey
Drude" because he made a force field called Drude) and he made everyone stand up
and sing it.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">The fantastic <a href="https://twitter.com/alex_mackerell?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@alex_mackerell</a>, leading the audience in a rendition of &quot;Hey Drude&quot; <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSSpring2022?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSSpring2022</a> <a href="https://twitter.com/ACSCOMP?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@ACSCOMP</a> <a href="https://t.co/fMXAWU2vFp">pic.twitter.com/fMXAWU2vFp</a></p>&mdash; Adrian Roitberg (@adrian_roitberg) <a href="https://twitter.com/adrian_roitberg/status/1506447604929863688?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 23, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

### Poster session

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr"><a href="https://twitter.com/AliaLescoulie?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@AliaLescoulie</a> and I are here for round 2! Come see us at the <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSCOMP?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSCOMP</a> poster session!<br><br>(we totally didn&#39;t swap blazers between Sci-Mix and now) <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/ACSSpring2022?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#ACSSpring2022</a> <a href="https://t.co/ak4KamkRuf">pic.twitter.com/ak4KamkRuf</a></p>&mdash; Astrid Yu üíô üíõ üè≥Ô∏è‚Äçüåà (@astralbijection) <a href="https://twitter.com/astralbijection/status/1506456949491048450?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 23, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

The COMP poster session was another 2 hours of presenting that went similarly to
Sci-Mix. This time, there were less people passing by (maybe only 20) but 2 guys
came over to judge us. A lot of people seemed impressed that we were undergrads;
most of the posters seemed to be by graduates or postdocs. A guy on the
admissions board for the Carnegie Mellon chemistry department was even there.

Surprisingly, we got to the second round of the judging, where it was narrowed
down to seven posters. We didn't get the grand prize, which was a free Nvidia
GPU, but we did get the sense of pride and accomplishment that came with
presenting our poster at our first ACS.

## Wednesday

We left San Diego at 10AM. We had Taco Bell for lunch somewhere in car-dependent
Orange County, and got back to SLO by 4:30.

Overall, it was a really fun trip and I learned a lot about chemistry. Even if I
didn't understand most of it, it was fun to get all this exposure to different
fields.